---
layout: post
title: "a walk in the woods"
date: 2015-08-05
---

I began and finished a book today. It’s been a while since I began reading a book, and even longer since I finished one. Today was different. Today I spent a ridiculous amount of time on the TTC with A Walk in the Woods by Bill Bryson. I have missed the small joys of reading physical books. The crips flick of a turning page delights my ear and the texture of paper is a tactile pleasure like none other. Making an exception for recent programming endeavours, it’s been years since I started and finished anything in one day. My backpack today contained three things: my laptop, a novel and a blank journal. While a laptop can run out of battery, and it did, the other two cannot.

Handwriting is a lost art form. As a child I never had the patience to refine my penmanship to anything that would be regarded as beautiful. I wish I scrawled notes in an elegant script but I fear I am too embedded in my current haphazard ways. This will be the first hand written blog post, a feat that I am sort of proud of. I will attach images of these pages to the blog post so the character of this entry is not lost. I should note that the TTC is not the smoothest ride, so I cannot take full responsibility for these chicken scratches. Perhaps I should just write slower but I hate having my hand lag behind the dialog churning out of my mind. I desire the responsiveness of a keyboard, a desire I’ve felt before I even knew computer’s existed.

Because I’ve taken it upon myself to write, I now appreciate the the writings of theres infinitely more. The ability to use a collection of squiggly lines and transport my imagination and feelings to a different place is a wonderful gift. Bill Bryson is an amazing author. Not only can he make information interesting, he makes it funny. Not only does each line read in a way that makes it hard not to chuckle, deliberate set ups and punchlines proliferate his work.

I recently read a chapter about his experiences with temperature changes at high altitudes. One second he’s enjoying the weather, the next he’s frantically searching for the warmer clothing that he forgot to pack. As he wrestles with the problem of self-diagnosing losing one’s mind, Bryson attempts to use his watch as a real world sanity check. The time is two minutes to eleven. After a score of thoughts pass through his mind, he checks again only to find it is still two minutes to eleven. After referring to the watch one more time, his adventure continues. After all the shenanigans that accompanied that particular stretch of the trail, Bryson relaxes, happy that he kept his wits about him. He brings his watch up to his face and notices that is still reads two minutes to eleven and with a shake the second hand starts to move.

The joke was so cleverly constructed, set up hidden and punchline delayed for maximum effect. If I could write something half as good in my life time I would die a happy man. It makes me realize that Bryson writes to be read. As I feel that I’ve mentioned all too often: I don’t expect anyone to read these hastily scrawled characters. Especially not these had written ones, I am barely able to make out my own script. In the coming week I will be spending a lot of time on the subway. Physical books are the only way I want to spend my subway time. Engorging myself with the written word is my reaction to today’s subway traveler.

Subway cars are filled with mindless people staring at screens. I do not want to be consumed by my iPhone for hours daily. I used to. I spent six years using technology to pass the time during my commute to school. Perhaps I developed better problem solving skills thanks to some games, but I didn’t spend my time reading. I didn’t learn how to articulate with grace, I didn’t learn who to think with a thunderous vocabulary. When you play a video game, your experience is created by the game designers. The route you take, the character you make and the levels you pass are all designed with the user in mind. Thus your experience is exactly what the producers wanted it to be. I am aware that certain games break the mould (Minecraft) but I am accurately addressing 99% of the games that fill the marketplace. On the other hand, reading inspires imagination. Reading encourages the user to interpret words into meaning.

Some say a picture is worth a thousand words, but the equality does not go the other way. With one thousand words an author can create a landscape so vast a video couldn’t capture it. With one thousand words a writer could sculpt a personality so riddled with nuance that an image would always short. There are many reasons to praise the written word, and I’m afraid I’ve only scratched the surface.

I’ve attempted to stick true to my original first draft, but edits were needed. 