---
layout: post
title: "polymath"
date: 2015-06-27
---

When I was a small child I was first introduced to the term “Renaissance Man” by my parents. It was used to describe a family friend who was apparently good at everything. As testament to their statement my mother explained that he could fix a watch. The fact that this man could fix a watch, among other things, was a sign of being well rounded and an expert in diverse fields.

Growing up the term “Renaissance Man” was casually used to refer to me by my parents as I developed new and diverse skills. I was an oddball kid to say the least. Among my list of skills was knitting, piano, soccer and god knows what else. Very little thought was put into this by my younger self as I was blissful unaware of what anyone thought of me. Maturity is being productively self-aware, being able to look not only inwards on who one is but being able to view one’s external self from the perspective of others.

The idea of being a Renaissance Man fermenting at the back of my mind for a while. Much like this blog suggests, I reflected retrospectively and started to agglomerate my various accolades. By far one of the most interesting notes is my involvement in music. It’s fairly obvious to anyone outside my life looking in that I’m athletically and academically inclined individual. Finishing first year with a 4.0 GPA as a member of varsity sports team is no small achievement apparently. However this is not rare. I know of countless athletic engineers, programmers and a smattering who specialize in math. Music is a less common occurrence in my experience.

This trend may not even exist, it’s simply something that I’ve noticed as an athlete. Perhaps it has something to do with how musicians and athletes care for their body. Athletic injuries are a common occurrence and can be quite debilitating. For a dedicated musician, this is a very scary prospect and can discourage some from competing in certain sports.

My most recent piano teacher once told me a very illustrative story. Her daughter was preparing for her ARCT, which is a diploma awarded by The Royal Conservatory of Music and is recognized internationally as a teaching qualification, and she was concurrently playing rugby in high school. To say rugby is a contact sport is to undersell it’s physical nature and obviously my piano teacher was worried about her daughter’s fingers. The following year, still training for the ARCT exam, her daughter switched sports from rugby to ultimate frisbee. This was a compromise with her mother as Ultimate has a lower chance of injury. Ironically a few month before her exam she broke her finger playing Ultimate and had to reschedule the exam for much much later.

Perhaps there aren’t a deficit of musicians in sports, or perhaps there are other reasons that trump my explanation. This leaves me wrestling with the idea of a Renaissance Man. It’s not a label I really want as I feel it sells me far too high, because hey, I can’t fix a watch. In times of great desperation, turning to Google is a profitable habit. Wikipedia redirects Renaissance Man to “Polymath”.

Wikipedia defines polymath as:

_A **polymath** (Greek: πολυμαθής, polymathēs, “having learned much”) is a person whose expertise spans a significant number of different subject areas; such a person is known to draw on complex bodies of knowledge to solve specific problems._

I quite like this definition. It doesn’t overrepresent my accomplishments but doesn’t sell me short either. I’ve always had an affinity to math and it’s incorporation in this word feels right.

In an attempt to rediscover my significant number of different subject areas that I know, a list that seems to define me has come to fruition. The most practical thing to do would be to design a new personal website that revolves around this idea. The key ideas in the creation of this new site is that it boasts more visual images than text. Instead of creating a complication system of navigation that I experimented with previously, it shall be just a collection of webpages sorted with elegant navigation menus and such.

Time is the only finite resource we posses, thank you for yours