---
layout: post
title: "one day website"
date: 2015-06-11
categories: personal
description: Yesterday I wrote the code for a new personal website in a single day. I didn’t set out to write all in a single day, but when you have nothing planned it just happens that way.
---

Yesterday I wrote the code for a new personal website in a single day. I didn’t set out to write all in a single day, but when you have nothing planned it just happens that way. The idea began late Tuesday night when I designed a new personal logo off the idea that it should reflect some part of me. This lead to me creating a volleyball inspired logo. Volleyballs are circles, my logo was a circle, and I wanted to incorporate it into my next project, somehow. So I slept on the issue, what is the best way to use a circular logo in a website design. From my extended research I have figured out how to make a standard website, so this was obviously not the way to go. I wanted to do something different, to push myself to make something new. I didn’t want it to look like any old WordPress theme.

I decided to have my logo front and center, I designed it so why not show it off? The concept started off as such: if the user clicked above the logo, the logo would move upwards revealing content below it. It would likewise move for content below, left and right. This original concept mutated just a little bit once I realized how painful triangles were. This chain of decision making left me with a screen divided into four sections and a circular logo in the center.

One of my biggest regrets about my first website was how I sized objects. The width of the container was 1000px, a very easily chosen arbitrary number that looked “just right”. However as the window was resized, the content stayed at the size in pixels that I had defined. This may work fine when it’s only me viewing it on the same laptop and always while in fullscreen, however I don’t believe this is the best practice for developers. That experience left me with the desire to dable with %s. This was a concept that I intellectually understood, and yet couldn’t quite grasp enough to make it work well.

In addition to involving volleyball in my logo, I wanted to incorporate, somehow, my love of the out-of-doors. My obvious conclusion was to make my logo green. Problem solved. This theme crossed over to the finer points of my webdesign. My “theme” gave me a reason to learn how to use GIMP better and create ornate paths that looked like plant tendrils/vines.

I didn’t encounter any major set backs on this journey, or it wouldn’t have taken me only a single day. This thing that I’m doing, this blog, should really be used for recording my experiences developing, I’ve heard it’s what good developers do. This appears to be the first entry with that kind of thread to it. Although I do have to admit that this is far from an ideal entry. I’ve only really talked about the design choices that I made and why I came to those decisions. All of the nitty-gritty programming problems were forgotten as they were all solved with either a compromise or a Google Search. For my future endevours that take me more than the waking hours in a day, I will try to check into my thoughts, feelings and frustrations by using this blog. I don’t expect anyone to actually read this, but talking about issues that one is having usually does wonders in resolving said issues.
