---
layout: post
title: "design"
date: 2015-05-26
---

Some might say that it is peculiar I have ended up studying design of all things during my free time. I came to the University of Toronto to study Math and only a single year later I find myself watching documentaries titled “Helvetica” and compiling colour palettes. Most would say that this behaviour is peculiar. I disagree.

Mathematics led me to Computer Science. That may be a bit of a lie. Failing ECO100 directly led me to take a Computer Science course in the winter semester of first year, but being in math allowed me to seamlessly transition into the Computer Science Major. My life would not have unfolded as it has if I started studying Ancient Greek. Computer Science is fun with all of it’s Monty Python puns and whatnot but throughout my assignments and tests I hit a couple of mental blocks. I wouldn’t say they were moments of depression, but they were impasses that I couldn’t figure out. More often than not it would be why isn’t my code working, particularly the night before it is due. I realized the impasses were because I was studying I wasn’t 100% invested in. The same principle goes for math. There are times when I hit a brick wall with a problem that makes me contemplate why I am even sitting there in the first place. These are brick walls that you cannot simply reason with, or put off until later. These are project stopping, jaw dropping brick walls.

So Mathematics and Computer Science as general topics do not pull on 100% of me, but they do interest me to a degree that I’ve decided to double major in them. Now this is where the summer comes into play, what do I do over the summer? My first thought was to work out more, for the sake of the team and for the simple reason that I wanted to be stronger. Even with my 7am – 9am work outs each day, the rest of the day becomes open with endless possiblities. I decided to learn as much Computer Science as I could on my own. I decided to teach myself a variety of programming languages, as a breadth of knowledge begets more opportunity down the road.

Along my conquest to acquire new languages, I happened across HTML/CSS. One cannot mention HTML without the accompanying nod to CSS. For HTML would not be what it is today without the support of CSS. To be frank, the website that this blog is currenlty hosted on was designed entirely by me (robertsonmcclure.github.io). While creating this website as an exercise to become better at HTML/CSS I realized how hard it was to make things, websites in particular, beautiful. Choices like color and font took way more time than I expected and even after making my decision I didn’t feel satisfied. Looking back I’m sure I could’ve made a better choice, and this website would look better, be more intuitive or be more readable. This prompted my investigation into design.

For the purpose of webdesign, I want to know why certain things are aestetically pleasing. I want to know how a font choice can affect the user. I want to know how to select a colour pallete that is so beautiful the user doesn’t notice it at all. When was the last time you stopped and noticed what colours a website used in their design? How many shades of blue does Facebook use in just their home page? I’m also thinking about mouse over animations here, where the slight shading to objects indicate to the user how they are supposed to be used and if they are supposed to be used at all.

This post isn’t really all about design, but on my own introduction to it. Mathematicians aren’t the group of people you most expect to get into design and whatnot, but stranger things happen every day. I’m excited where this new path will take me. As long as I’m learning something new everyday, I’m a very happy camper.

Time is the only finite resource we possess, thank you for yours