---
layout: post
title: "grit"
date: 2015-07-06
categories: personal
description: The saying “Practice Makes Perfect” is so overrated it’s underrated.
---

The saying “Practice Makes Perfect” is so overrated it’s underrated. It is so popular it isn’t cogitated longer than a second due to it’s all encompassing popularity. Have you ever tried to look at something as if you were for the first time? It’s harder than it sounds. “Practice Makes Perfect” is true, however many around me have attempted to tweak it to make it resonate with a new idea. For example, a volleyball coaches once told me that “practice doesn’t make perfect, perfect practice makes perfect”. He was trying to drive the point that I must practice excellence in order to achieve excellence. Other cynical friends of mine have attempted to push the phrase “practice makes for a lot of wasted time”.

I’m not really interested in discussing sport mentalities or philosophies about sayings. They are fascinating topics, don’t get me wrong, but I don’t have an interest at this point in time to actually put deep thought into them. Instead I intend to use these squiggly lines that conveniently convey meaning to deal with my attempts to form new productive habits. Every now and then I get inspired to change my life, it usually comes in the form of making a resolution to do something every day. Years ago it was to wake up early everyday, keep my room clean or read a book before falling to sleep. It may not sound difficult but these are hard to do. More recently the “every day changes” that I’ve been attempting to implement have all been designed to make me a better person. I use the term better person loosely as some are for the sole purpose of helping me acquire skills that will make me more employable in the future.

For example I’ve been waking up at 5:50am every day and going to the Goldring Centre for High Performance Sport and working out at 7am – 9am. Recently I’ve been traveling so this has been side tracked and I feel awful about it. In an attempt to make up for lost exertion, I’ve started running. Yes I am well aware that a 5km run does not replace two hours weightlifting, but it does something for my mind. Not only does it make me feel good about the day by being active, it is a struggle to run. The mental focus required to run a distance fast is immense. Over the last two weeks I have gained so much respect for those who run, and an admiration for those who can do so fast.

At first I continued to post a better and better time for 5km. I decided to run 5km because it seemed like a well known distance, one that is decently far, and doesn’t require a long recovery time. The first time I ever ran 5km continuously I achieved a time of 26:54, I was exhausted. I used the Nike Running iPhone app to track my performance. For a while, every run got increasingly faster. Within a week I had gotten down to 22:21. I was over the moon, elated, but I knew it couldn’t last. I couldn’t keep up this trajectory and run faster with each passing day. The first day that I ran slower than my personal best was unexpectedly devastating. When all I’ve ever experienced with running was the euphoric high of beating my personal best on each run, this new feeling was a stark contrast. Since then it’s been harder to beat my personal best. I’ve chipped away at every few runs.

Because this past week was spent en route between Niagra-On-The-Lake, Toronto and Ottawa, I decided that I would run 5km a day. On Monday I ran 10km on the Martin Goodman Trail and didn’t quite make the time that I wanted. Over the next 6 days I religiously ran 5km, no matter where in Ontario I happened to be. On the seventh day I bested myself and managed to get a sub-21 minute time running 5 kilometres. To anyone that actually runs: this isn’t impressive, but I don’t consider myself a runner. In the last 15 days I’ve run a grand total of 65km and that’s pretty cool if you ask me.

For the longest time I’ve trained to be a volleyball player. Volleyball is all about short explosive actions like jumping or hitting the ball with an open hand. Running long distances is not about explosive power. Why am I even doing this? Honestly I’m not sure. There is no answer to the ever probing “WHY” but there are benefits and I’m happy to reap the rewards. “Mental Toughness” is a phrase an old volleyball coach of mine used often and I’m repurposing it to explain what exactly I getting out of running. Convincing yourself to continue to put one foot in front of the other seems easy, but it’s harder to do than to say. The ache in your legs than plant the thought, inception style, that you should stop running and take a break is hard to ignore. When your focus lapses and starts to wander through your body, taking an inventory over what hurts and  creates The Manifesto of Why You Should Stop Running, it’s a compelling read. The thought that all this pain is self inflicted and you could end it whenever you want to is difficult to handle. Dealing with these ideas, doubts, aches and experiences is what I call mental toughness.

Pushing yourself to the limit is hard and context is everything. Pushing yourself to the limit in a volleyball game is relatively easy. There is a crowd, your teammates and your coach. I’m not saying that it’s easier to perform under pressure, but the pressure gives a concrete reason TO perform and quells the doubtful voices in your head. Running alone is a whole other story. If you stop for a break, no one will know. Stopping for a break on a run isn’t defined as a failure, you can convince yourself that it’s a necessary part of your run. Ending your run early can be chalked up to a variety of reasons and no one will know that you gave up. I cannot comment on running an actual race, all I know is running alone on a variety of trails around Toronto. I find it hard to continue to push myself running, but I will try.

I don’t really expect this post, or even this blog, to be read by anyone but myself. I’m not a runner, but I’m trying to run as often as I can. I’m not a writer, but I’m trying to write a blog post as often as I can. I’m approaching running and writing the same way. Do a little bit frequently and continue to push myself to be better. Running is easy to measure, writing is not. I have no idea if my writing has improved since my first blog post. Even if I don’t improve my metaphorical time with my writing, I believe I’m improving my metaphorical mental toughness. Writing requires reflection and the more I reflect the more I learn about myself and the more time I spend actually thinking.

Practice makes perfect, so I practice. I practice running. I practice writing. I practice critical thinking. I practice good sleep habits. I don’t expect to become perfect anytime soon, or at all for that matter. I do expect to become better than I was. I probably won’t compete in a running race in the near future, the price tag discourages me. However every time I run, I run against my past self. I’ve thought about Future Me and Past Me quite a lot in recent months.

I make plans for Future Me. I do things to created a better Future Me.

I make plans because of the actions of Past Me. I judge Future Me by comparing him to Past Me.

Practice makes perfect. I practice making Future Me better than Past Me.
