---
layout: post
title: "dial 666 333 333 for off"
date: 2015-08-09
---

I did not own a smart phone until the beginning of my final year of high school. In comparison to my peers, I was behind the times. I had had a cellular phone since grade 7, but never one with a touch screen. Until that point, the phone existed as a method of contacting my parents. I would call them to let them know where I was or what I was doing. All of my friends were texting each other but I had a phone with 10 buttons, each with a number from 0 to 9. To type the letter “A” I would have to press 2 once, to type “B” I would press 2 twice etc. “S” was a particular challenge as it required the number 7 to be pressed four times. I won’t say that buying an iPhone 5S changed my life, but my dependance on it has increased exponentially.

For the last two years, my life has been linked to that phone. I plan my day through the calendar app and communicate with friends through a plethora of social media applications. There was always a game on my home screen. For the longest time I was addicted to a game called Threes! It was similar to a very popular game called 2048 where tiles slide around a grid and combine by very simple rules.This is how I filled in-between time.

If I was waiting at a bus stop, I would simply pull out my phone. Usually this involved refreshing whatever feed I was interested in, checking the time or weather and usually concluded with me opening a game. As months went by I used my phone longer and longer each day. It dawned on me that this was a problem when a full battery could no longer last me an entire day. I can recall checking Facebook while a professor erased a chalkboard to see if a friend had responded. This wasn’t a one time thing, it was far from it. Filling the in-between moments of life by checking my iPhone was the norm. I don’t want it to be like that.

This summer has been filled with making changes to my habits. These changes have not been resolutions for resolutions sake but each has been created to address something I was didn’t like about myself. As I am currently less than pleased with my reliance on technology and I will attempt to change my relationship with my phone. Most things I do come through my phone so my first reaction was to make some small changes. These did not stick around long. Small changes don’t stick well. Small changes are easy to break because deviating back to the norm is the easiest thing to do. Therefore I will do something that I seldom do: turn my phone off. Of course I’ve turned my phone off before, for a movie, theatre outing or to save battery. I have never turned my phone off for the sake of not needing to check it.

Today I worked my first full day at Sitting Volleyball for the Parapan American Games Toronto 2015. My shift was scheduled for 2pm – 10pm, and my commute is 2 hours one way. While working a game, it was clearly instructed to us that we were not to have our phones out. This seemed like a perfect opportunity to actually turn off my iPhone. As I left the house in the morning I unplugged my fully charged phone from the foot of my bed and promptly turned it off. Almost immediately I had a nagging feeling that I needed to check my phone. Following on it’s heels was the question “Why?”. Why did I need to look at my phone? This stayed my hand for a moment. I guess I could justify it by checking the time, but that didn’t satisfy me. I wasn’t expecting anyone to text or call, and did my Instagram feed really need the refresh? Before I even began my commute in earnest, I found myself reaching for my phone again. Apparently the TTC clock the didn’t exist and I still felt the need to check the time. I often find myself checking the time while commuting. Even though I can do nothing about the speed of the subway train, or the tardiness of my bus, checking the time comforts me during my commutes. It assures me that I will be early, as I always give myself extra time. But my phone is off.

Each time that I considered turning my phone on, one thing made me stop. I asked myself if the action I was about to perform was necessary to the point that it justified the iPhone’s arduously long start up time. By arduously long I’m referring to 28 seconds, I just timed it. Only when I had to communicate with my mother to coordinate my travel plans home did the phone briefly turn on. After a full day of travel and work that would normally leave me with 5 – 10 percent battery life remaining, I had a whopping 92%.

One might ask how I filled my day, if none of it was spent staring at my phone. I read in the subway and listened to the hustle and bustle of fellow urban dwellers. I managed to finish Creative Inc. by Ed Catmull and Amy Wallace, a fascinating book that has an ending that moved me to tears. Coming home I cracked the spin of How We Decide by Jonah Lehrer. I’m euphoric that my extended commute has given me the opportunity to rediscover the joys of reading. What about all the in-between time that occurred during my 8 hour shift? I did half a crossword and talked with my coworkers. Today was a really nice day.

Time is the only finite resource we posses, thank you for yours