---
layout: post
title: Stolen Word Play
date: 2016-09-10
tags: [ideas]
excerpt: A collection of interesting linguistic things that I'm collecting from the interwebz
---

Once upon a midnight dreary, while I ponder, weak and weary. Over many a quaint and curious volumes of forgotten stuff that has been uploaded onto the internet, I find something of interest. Something that makes me go "huh". Something that makes me smile, laugh or drops my jaw to the floor. Normally, I just scroll past and continue my quest for that next moment of respite.

No longer.

Since I love to copy and paste, I want to save some of these. This may be dated September 2016, but I will continue to add to this as more interesting nuggets are discovered. If you find any that fall into this category, contact me. I really don't care if you email me, find me on Facebook, tweet at me, comment on Instagram, I'll get your message somehow, someway, and that's what counts. 

> What's the difference between a cat and a comma?
>
> One has claws at the end of its paws and one is a pause at the end of a clause.

> I just invented a new word: Plagiarism

> Did you know that adjectives in English absolutely have to be in this order: opinion-size-age-shape-colour-origin-material-purpose Noun. so you can have a lovely little old rectangular green French silver whittling knife. But if you mess with that word order in the slightest you'll sound like a maniac. It's an add thing that every English speaker uses that list, but almost none of us could write it out. And as size comes before colour, green great dragons can't exist.
