---
layout: post
title: "up up and away"
date: 2015-05-29
categories: personal
description: I really feel like I’ve turned to a new page in my life. 
---

I really feel like I’ve turned to a new page in my life. I’ve created a routine each day with every part designed to make me a better person. I listen to audiobooks on my bikerides and all commutes. I work out at 7am each day, making productive work at 9am possible. I only check email once a day and this has not only decreased time wasted on email, but saves my battery life. Before I started this new phase I had to recharge my phone every night, but then another time before the day ended. Bringing an iPhone charging cable around is not my idea of an ideal life style. Now my phone is roughly at 50% every time I go to bed, I no longer fear my phone dying and no longer do I have the hassle of carrying another cable around. I practice piano, or perform through my repetoire, at least once a day. This relaxes me and keeps my pieces fresh at at my finger tips. I’m eating breakfast every morning, giving me enough time to get home to make lunch after working out/working downtown. I’ve reduced the purchase and consumption of extraneous goods, which mainly consisted of edible goods. This habit carried over from university living because once my dining hall closed, I had to find alternative food options. I’m trying to shake that habit and it’s going decently well so far. I’m writing a blog post each day, working on writing skills and translating thoughts to articulate words.

Why am I doing this? I see the opportunity presented before me and I want to take it. I have an entire summer before me and less time commitment than during the school year. Now is the time to build good habits and routines. This amount of time also allows me to reap the rewards of my new routines as the benefits will become noticable after enough time elapses. I had the idea of waking up at 7am and working out every day of the week during school. However too many late nights working on Problem Sets and social events that went late into the night with friends severly hindered my ability of waking up in the morning. During the summer I have no deadlines, I don’t have an opportunity to socialize with friends every night. That may sound lonely but I’ve been getting to bed early and truly enjoying the sleep.

When I was 16 I joined a gym called FITS Toronto. The main reason was for their therapists to fix whatever injury I had at that time. I stayed on and joined their ‘Flight’ program, designed to make the participants jump higher. I did a few workouts before I got injured again, it was hard work. The whole experience is beginning to grow fuzzy in my memory but I will never forget the change room. It was a small and modest change room, but plastering one wall was artistically arranged motivational quotations. There were quotes from Michael Jordan, Tiger Woods, the great athletes of our generation. This artsy wall of motivation captivated my attention whenever I had to get changed. One day I got talking to another member of the gym and he said something I remember more clearly than any one quotation from the wall. “Sleep is the most underated performance booster an athlete has” is my recollection of what he said. The following three years: Grade 10, 11 and 12, I performed and studied on roughly 6-7 hours of sleep each night, sometimes less. I did not listen to his advice at all. However that phrase and idea came back to me, like a recurring dream, every now and then.

I now have the opportunity to get more sleep, so I can perform each and every morning at the gym. It’s doing wonders for my alertness every morning. I’ve stopped rolling over and lying there ‘for just a few more seconds’. I just feel better every morning. The wonders of a good nights sleep is definitely ‘underated’. Add this to all the other changes I’ve implemented and I feel like a new person. All I need to focus on now is to maintain this lifestyle, I hope I can.
